Unmanned aerial vehicles are an emerging technology that can provide a superior option in obtaining remote data with less time, lower cost as well as higher safety compared to piloted aerial vehicles. Although promising, the performance of propulsion systems in unmanned aerial vehicles still needs to be significantly improved to meet the requirement for executing increasingly difficult missions. Due to the higher efficiency and better reliability comparing to conventional combustion engines, electrical systems with no greenhouse gas emission and low noise and vibration attract much more attention. Among them, fuel cells, as an advanced power generation technology, are regarded as alternative power sources in electrical systems because they offer higher energy density to extend the duration of flight. For the same energy capacity, the weight of fuel cells is 3.5 times lower than that of lithium-ion batteries, resulting in much preferable specific energy. This review article provides a general description of the working principle of fuel cells and the category of unmanned aerial vehicles, introduces two types of propulsion systems that involve fuel cells, i.e., pure fuel cell system and hybrid system, describes the design methods and simulation cases, as well as summarizes the practical flight tests.
Introduction
As a variety of complicated missions inadaptable for humans are arising in both military and civil fields such as visual condition inspections [1], mechanical devices have been adopted to carry out the missions in consideration of the safety, viability, and efficiency [2]. In remote sensing and data acquiring missions, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) that are expected to be the most appropriate candidate have received ever-increasing attentions and made great progress in hyperspectral imaging for agriculture and forestry [3], UAV regulations [4], wireless sensor networks [5], communication between the UAVs and the ground control station [6], and UAV system design [7] in recent decades. For civil use, applications of UAVs can be concluded as follows: (1) scientific research and remote sensing [8], (2) forestry monitoring to protect the endangered species and in case of bushfire [9], (3) rapid detection of the disaster area after earthquakes, tsunamis, and hurricanes for subsequent rescue [6], [7], [10], and (4) seasonable inspection for the survivors in hazardous situations including conflagration, gas poisoning, and house collapse so as to increase the possibility of saving lives [11]. For military use, UAVs are the first choice to execute intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) missions in the battlefield due to the dangerous situations that may lead to unnecessary sacrifice [12]. For instance, the UAVs equipped with infrared camera can still work at night [13]. It has no alternative but employs UAVs to remotely collect the information inside buildings, closed channels, and narrow pipes [10]. In general, UAVs provide an admirable option to acquire remote data with less time, lower cost as well as higher safety compared to piloted aerial vehicles.
The most crucial component of a UAV is the propulsion system which supplies energy to drive itself to execute missions, because the flight endurance, specific energy, and specific power are substantially influenced by the characteristics of the propulsion system. Briefly, the specific power plays an important role in the maximum speed, load capacity, altitude of flight, and the climbing rate. The specific energy has dominant effects on the flight endurance. Initially, conventional engines were employed as the power sources. However, the conventional engines exhibit less competitive in terms of the total weight, vibration, and noise comparing to electrical systems. Additionally, the green gas emission and air pollution problem should be taken into consideration as the environmental issues have raised growing concern. For these reasons, the environmental problems are dramatically alleviated when electrical systems replace the conventional engines as the propulsion systems. Meanwhile, the electrical systems offer less weight, which contributes to higher specific energy that is beneficial for long-endurance missions. Currently, batteries that are the most common energy storage systems in the electrical systems to power UAVs are replacing the conventional combustion engines gradually, due to their superior features in efficiency, reliability, noise, and vibration. Among various batteries, lithium-ion batteries have been successfully utilized in various applications because of their higher specific power, longer cycle life, and lower self-discharge property [14], [15]. However, a critical issue associated with the use of lithium-ion batteries is the excessive weight, resulting in lower specific energy and specific power around 75–200 Wh/kg and 500–2000 W/kg, respectively [16]. The insufficient specific energy of lithium-ion batteries may diminish the flight endurance and increase the operational cost of UAVs. In addition, there are several other issues of concern. Firstly, lithium-ion batteries are vulnerable to short-circuiting and overcharging, which is harmful to the long-time operation. Secondly, the operation temperature of lithium-ion batteries will increase due to the heat generation through reactions. Once the temperature reaches the critical point, not only the batteries will be burned, but also the UAVs will be destroyed. Thirdly, the heat generated by batteries will be discovered by an infrared detector. Particularly in military missions, UAVs are expected to be utterly quiet and stealthy to guarantee obtaining the required information without being detected. Notably, the recycling processes of lithium-ion batteries are also of great environmental concern.
Among various power suppliers, fuel cells have been introduced to UAVs serving as power supply, since it is a green and efficient energy-conversion technology [17], [18], [19], [20]. It was demonstrated that fuel cells output a constant power with less weight than batteries, indicating that specific energy and specific power of the fuel cell powering system are both higher [14]. It was reported by Chen et al. [16] that hydrogen fuel cells could offer specific energy and specific power up to 800–10,000 Wh/kg and 500 W/kg, respectively. In addition, the efficiency of hydrogen fuel cells is approximately 44%, which is twice higher than that of internal combustion engines. Since compressed hydrogen is selected as the fuel for fuel cells in these UAVs, the final product is only water, resulting in a zero emission. Another feature of fuel cells are low noise and low infrared signals [21]. Although promising, it is believed that the currently developed UAVs powered by fuel cells is immature in the aspects of further reduction in weight, volume, and cost. The main problem of fuel cells is the relatively low specific power, imposing restrictions on the missions that require a high specific power. A solution to this problem is to hybridize fuel cell with lithium-ion batteries, which exploits the superiorities of both batteries and fuel cells, thereby creating a highly responsive hybrid system possessing a high specific power, while maintaining the significant advantage of high energy density [22]. In addition, the electricity generated by fuel cells can be partially used to power the UAVs and the remaining can be stored in batteries for further use. The UAVs running on hydrogen fuel cells with reduced weight are able to execute the missions not requiring high specific power, which are used be carried out by UAVs running on internal combustion engine. Since the issue of specific power is resolved in hybrid system, UAVs running on hybrid system are capable of performing all kinds of the missions.
This review starts with a brief introduction to working principles of two types of fuel cells, i.e., hydrogen fuel cells and direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs). Tremendous research has been conducted on hydrogen fuel cells in UAVs, while limited research has been devoted into DMFCs in UAVs. Secondly, three UAV categories are discussed, including fixed wings, rotary wings, and flapping wings based on the way of propulsion and lift. Thirdly, detailed descriptions of hydrogen fuel cells and hybrid propulsion systems are given and three common design methods defined by parametric models and design criteria are summarized. Fourthly, we summarize the theoretical simulation results and practical flight testing results, in order to offer a comparison reference for performance evaluation. Finally, remaining challenges and future perspectives are highlighted.